---
title: "1.1"
layout: borabrav
description: "Dynnargh dhe'n Klass Kernewek"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-02-05T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Polin Prys"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false
draft: false
---


## Reading Dynnargh dhe’n klass Kernewek

{{< section class="message-divider" >}}
Friday, Sep 20, 10:40 AM
{{< /section >}}

 {{< chat 
        
        icon="/img/numbers/one.jpg"  
        name="Mestresik Marner" 
        time="to everone"
        text="Dydh da."

 >}}

 {{< chat-r 
        class="user"
        icon="/img/numbers/one.jpg"  
        name="An klass" 
        time="class responds"
        text="Dydh da."
        colour="green"
 >}}

  {{< chat 
        
        icon="/img/numbers/one.jpg"  
        name="Mestresik Marner" 
        time="to Thomas"
        text="Marner ov. Piw osta?"

 >}}

  {{< chat-r 
        class="user"
        icon="/img/numbers/one.jpg"  
        name="Mester Tomos" 
        time=""
        text="Mester Tomas ov vy."
        colour="red"

 >}}


{{< section class="section mt-3 mb-3" >}}



4 : 
5 Mestresik Marner:Pur dha. Dyskadores ov vy ha studhyer osta. Pyth owgh?
6 Andi: Studhyer ov vy.
7 Estelle: Studhyores ov vy.
8 Mestresik Marner:Ha Stefano hag Andi, pyth owgh hwi?
9 Stefano + Andi: Studhyoryon on ni.
10 Mestresik Marner:Pur dha. Ha py klass yw hemma, mar pleg?
11 Mestresik Choak: An klass Kernewek yw hemma.
12 Mestresik Marner:Pleth osta trigys, Estelle?
13 Estelle: Trigys ov vy yn Kernow, lemmyn.
14 Mestresik Marner:Ha fatell yw an gewer hedhyw?
15 Syvi: Nyns yw da an gewer hedhyw! Drog yw hi.
16 Mestresik Marner:Ha fatla genowgh hwi?
17 Mestres Pengelli: Yn poynt da, meurastajy.
18 Stefano: Ha my ynwedh, yn poynt da.
19 Andi: Skwith ov vy!


(kemmerys dhiworth Bora Brav gans Polin Prys)
A full translation is given below
1 Miss Marner: Hello
2 The class: Hello
3 Miss Marner: I am Miss Marner. Who are you?
4 Mr Tomas: I am Mr Tomas.
5 Miss Marner: Very good. I am a teacher and you are a student. What are you?
6 Andi: I am a student.
7 Estelle: I am a student.
8 Miss Marner: And Stephano and Andi, what are you?
9 Estelle: We are students.
10 Miss Marner: Very good. And what class is this, please?
11 Miss Choak: This is the Cornish class.
12 Miss Marner: Where do you live, Estelle?
13 Estelle: I live in Cornwall, now.
14 Miss Marner: _And what’s the weather like today?_
15 Syvi: _The weather is not good today! It’s bad._
16 Miss Marner: And how are you?
17 Mrs Pengelli: Well, thank you.
18 Stefano: And me also, well.
19 Andi: _I’m tired!_



Grammar Notes

Greetings
Lines 1 and 2
Dydh da literally means good day but is usually used in a more general way
to mean ‘hello’


Myttin da good morning
Dohajydh da good afternoon
Gorthugher da good evening
Nos dha/nos da good night (you will hear both being used)
Duw genes good bye (to one person)
Duw genowgh good bye (to more than one person)
```
```
The verb to be Bos
Lines 3 – 15, 19
```
Positive statement Negative statement interrogative
.. ov (vy) I am .. Nyns ov (vy).. I am not .. Ov (vy)...? _Am I ...?_
.. os (ta) You are .. Nyns os (ta).. You are not.. Os (ta)...? _Are you ...?_
.. yw (ev) He is .. Nyns yw ev.. _He isn’t .._ Yw ev ..? Is he ..?
.. yw (hi) She is .. Nyns yw hi.. _She isn’t .._ Yw hi ..? Is she ..?
.. on (ni) We are .. Nyns on (ni).. _We aren’t .._ On (ni) ..? Are we ..?
.. owgh (hwi) You are .. Nyns owgh (hwi).. _You aren’t .._ Owgh (hwi) ..? Are you ...?
.. yns (i) They are. Nyns yns (i).. _They aren’t .._ Yns (i) ..? Are they ..?

```
The pronouns in brackets may be omitted, but ev and hi are usually used to
avoid confusion.
```
```
Mutations
Some words change the first letter after certain words in some circumstances!
The unchanged state is found in the dictionary
The soft or second state is given in the table
```
```
b ch d ga ge gi gl gr gw gy go gu gro gru k m p t
2 nd v j dh a e i l r w y wo wu wro wru g v b d
```
```
The first line shows that words beginning with ‘ d ’, like ‘ da ’ (good) are found in
the dictionary under the letter ‘ d ’, but sometimes they change the ‘ d ’ to ‘ dh ’ as
shown in the second line. Or that, for example, words beginning with ‘ m ’
sometimes change the ‘ m ’ to a ‘ v ’. This is called ‘mutation’.
```
```
Line 5, 10 good da very good pur dha
```
```
The word pur (very) causes the next word to mutate as above
```

```
Line 14, 15 weather kewer the weather an gewer
The word an (the) causes a following feminine singular noun to mutate as
above. So because ‘ kewer ’ is feminine when we put ‘ an’ (the) before it the ‘ k ’
changes to a ‘ g ’. This does not happen to ‘ klass ’ which is masculine, so ‘ an
klass ’ (the class).
```
```
Gender
Many masculine nouns make the feminine by adding ‘-es’, there is sometimes
a vowel change and the stress changes; most words in Cornish have the
stress on the penultimate syllable
```
```
st udh yer studh yor es
dys ka dor dyska dor es
```
```
Questions like osta studhyer? Require yes or no answers
In Cornish we have to repeat the verb, as there are no words for yes and no,
and say ‘I am’ or ‘she is not’, for example. But remember, that’s only the
literal meaning – you should think of them as meaning ‘yes’ and ‘no’.
```
Osta studhyer? Ov, studhyer ov (vy) Yes, I am a student

```
Nag ov, nyns ov (vy) studhyer No, I’m not a student
```
Yw ev dyskador? Yw, dyskador yw ev. Yes, he is a teacher.

```
Nag yw, nyns yw ev dyskador No, he isn’t a teacher.
Ha (and) becomes hag when followed by a vowel
Nag (no) is usually na except when followed by a vowel (in the verb bos)
Nyns (not) is usually ny except when followed by a vowel (in the verb bos)
```
```
You will have noticed that dyskadores has been translated as ‘a teacher’ and
studhyer has been translated as ‘a student’ this is because Cornish has no
word for the English indefinite article ‘a’ or ‘an’ so dyskadores may be
translated as ‘teacher’ or ‘a teacher’ depending on context.
```
```
Exercise A1 Questions on the conversation.
```
```
1 Mestresik Marner says to Tomas ‘Piw os ta?’ What does he reply?
2 Py klass yw hemma?
3 Yw hemma an klass Kernewek?
4 Pleth yw Estelle trigys?
5 Fatell yw an gewer hedhyw?
6 Yw an gewer drog?
7 Yw Mestresik Marner studhyores?
8 Yw Andi dyskador?
And answer these about yourself
9 Osta studhyer/studhyores?
10 Osta dyskador/dyskadores?
```

```
Exercise A
Translate the following (example: Lowena is a student Studhyores yw
Lowena
1 Ann is a teacher 6 Faith is a student
2 Brian is a teacher 7 George is a man^1
3 Charles is a student 8 Benyn yw Helen
4 Dianne is a woman^2    9 Flogh^3 yw Isaac
5 Edward is a student 10 Studhyoryon yw Jessica ha Keith*
```
(^1) Man gour – an gour 2 Woman benyn – an venyn 3 flogh child
* this is good Cornish!(the reason for it will be explained later)
**_Part B_** An Gewer
An howl the sun
Howlyek yw_. It’s sunny_
Toemm yw_. It’s warm_
Sygh yw_. It’s dry_
An glaw the rain
Yeyn yw. _It’s cold_
Glyb yw_. It’s wet_
An kommol the clouds
Kommolek yw_. It’s cloudy_
An gwyns the wind
Gwynsek yw. _It’s windy_
An ergh the snow
Erghek yw It's snowy
Oer yw. _It’s bitterly cold_
An tewedh the storm
Hager awel yw_. It’s a gale_
Euthyk yw. _It’s horrible_
An gammneves the rainbow
Teg yw_. It’s pretty_
An niwl the fog
Niwlek yw. _It’s foggy_
Ass yw toemm an gewer!
How warm the weather is!


_To ask what the weather is like we use the word ‘_ fatell _’, which means ‘how’.
So ‘_ fatell yw an gewer?’ _is ‘how is the weather?’ or ‘what is the weather like?’_

**_Exercise B_**

Fatell yw an gewer omma? What is the weather like, here?

_(PS The weather in the centre looks very mixed. You can decide if it’s cold,_
warm, pretty, horrible or whatever you think!)


**Gerva** **_(Vocabulary)_**
noun gender plural meaning
dyskador g dyskadoryon (male) teacher
dyskadores b dyskadoresow (female) teacher
studhyer g studhyoryon (male) student
studhyores b studhyoresow (female) student
klass g klassow class
kewer b weather
gour g gwer man
benyn b benynes woman
maw g mebyon boy
mowes b mowesi girl
flogh g fleghes child
chi g chiow house
g = gorow (masculine) b = benow (feminine)

**_Exercise B_**

_In English we might say ‘the house is bitterly cold’, but in Cornish we usually_

start with what it is we want to say about something. Here what we want to

say about _the house (‘_ an chi’ _) is that it is bitterly cold (‘_ oer _’), so that’s what we_

start with _– ‘_ oer yw an chi’.

Translate

1 The (male) teacher is wet 6 The weather is hot

2 The student (male) is cold 7 The house is bitterly cold

3 We are warm 8 I live in a house in Cornwall.

4 The (female) teacher is good 9 The class is good

5 They are bad 10 You are a student.

**_Part C_** Negatives

_When we make a negative statement ‘it isn’t’ or ‘I’m not’, for example, we_

_always start with the negative word ‘_ nyns _’ and then the verb. So ‘it isn’t_

_bitterly cold’ is ‘_ nyns yw oer’. To make the negative question we simply put a

_in front so ‘Isn’t it bitterly cold?’ is ‘_ A nyns yw oer?’

**_Exercise C_**

_1 We aren’t good_ 6 I am happy

_2 He isn’t bad_ 7 She is happy.

3 Are you cold? _8 She isn’t happy_

_4 Aren’t they warm? 9 Isn’t she happy?_

_5 They aren’t happy (_ lowen). _10 We aren’t bad!_


{{< /section >}}
