---
title: Kernow
layout: kdlold
description: Mutations and Indefinite Article
images:
- "/img/kdl800x400.jpg"
date: 2022-01-05T14:00:00.000+00:00
label: course
authors:
- Ray Edwards
audio: ''
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false

---
{{< audioGD 1kBWIGtvXnm_SjivaczPFjEed0qDaDUuD >}}

### KERNOW

Kernow yw konna tir orth penn Breten² Veur. Kernow yw bro geltek. Yowann yw Kernow. Ev a drig yn Kernow. Ev a gews Sowsnek. Ev a gews Kernewek ynwedh. Pyth yw mammyeth Yowann? Sowsnek yw mammyeth Yowann. Fatell dhysk Yowann Kernewek? Yowann yw esel a Gowethas an Yeth Kernewek. Ev a dhe glass rag dyski Kernewek. Prag y tysk ev Kernewek? Drefenn y vos Kernow!

### Gerva (Vocabulary)

{{< gerva "Kernow" "Cornwall, Cornishman" >}}

{{< gerva "pyth?" "what">}}

{{< gerva "mammyeth(f) Yowann" "John’s mother tongue">}}

{{< gerva "yw" "is">}}

{{< gerva "konna tir" "peninsula">}}

{{< gerva "Fatell² dhysk Yowann?" "How does Yowann learn?">}}

{{< gerva "orth penn" "at the end (of)">}}

{{< gerva "Breten² Veur (f)" "Gt. Britain">}}

{{< gerva "esel" "member">}}

{{< gerva "bro (f)"  "country">}}

{{< gerva "Kowethas an yeth (f) kernewek" "Cornish Language Fellowship">}}

keltek Celtic

Yowann John

Ev a dhe² glass He goes to a class

ev he

rag dyski (in order) to learn

yn in

Prag y^5 tysk ev Kernewek?

Why does he learn Cornish?

a² gews speaks

Sowsnek English^

Drefenn y² vos Kernow!
Because he is a Cornishman!

a² drig lives

Kernewek Cornish

benyn (f) woman

ynwedh also

bras great

All the nouns marked (f) are feminine. The others are masculine.
Pronunciation note: The word dhe meaning “to” is (exceptionally) pronounced exactly as the English word “the” (not “thee”).

### Govynnow (Questions)

All the answers can be found in the passage, and just copied down.
All except number 6 should be complete sentences.

1. Pyth yw Kernow?
2. Pyth yw Yowann?
3. Ple (Where) trig Yowann?
4. Pyth yw mammyeth Yowann?
5. Fatell dhysk Yowann Kernewek?
6. Prag y tysk ev Kernewek?

## Gramasek (Grammar)

### A. Mutations.

In Cornish, many words change their first letter, and this change depends on the word coming before it. The changes are called “mutations.”

The basic unchanged form as shown in the dictionary is called “First State,” and there are four possible sets of mutations which are numbered 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th state. They are described as follows:

1st state = basic dictionary form.
2nd state = soft mutation.
3rd state = aspirate (breathed) mutation.
4th state = hard mutation.
5th state = mixed mutation.

However, these states are usually referred to by their numbers. A table of mutations comes with this lesson.

A blank space on the table indicates that no change takes place. A dash shows that the letter drops out and the second letter becomes the initial one.

Note: K, P and T do not soften to G, B and D respectively when they follow S or TH at the end of the previous word.

They remain unchanged. Likewise K does not change to the 3rd state (H) when followed by L, N, or R. 

(You will appreciate that Hl, Hn and Hr would be rather difficult to say!).

You will see now why some words in the vocabulary have a figure after them.

The figure shows the mutation state of the following word, so, “a² gews” shows that “ **gews”** is in second state. Look at the table to find the first state of this word. It is “kews.”

### Exercise 1.

Write down the first state of the word following the numbered word.

 1. An² vro.
 2. Breten² deg.
 3. bro² geltek.
 4. Ev a² drig.
 5. Ev a² gews.
 6. Fatell² dhysk.
 7. **An² Gernewes** (Cornishwoman)
 8. Ev a dhe² glass.
 9. Prag y⁵ tysk ev?
10. Drefenn y² vos Kernewek.

### Exercise 2.

Here are some more to practise on. Write down the first state as before.

 1. **dhe² dre** (to town)
 2. **y² goweth** (his friend)
 3. **ow³ howeth** (my friend)
 4. **dhe² wir** (truly)
 5. **an² venyn** (the woman)
 6. **an² dus** (the men.)
 7. **dha² das** (your father)
 8. **ow³ thas** (my father)
 9. **yn⁵ fras** (greatly)
10. **ow⁴ tos** (coming)

It is impossible to use a dictionary unless you convert a mutated word back to its unmutated, first state form before looking it up.

The mutated forms are not shown. Always check with the table until you are perfectly familiar with all the mutations.

### B. Indefinite Article.

In English, this is the word “a” in front of a noun e.g. “a peninsula,” “a Cornishman.” You will see from the passage that it is not normally used in Cornish so that the Cornish for “a peninsula” is just “konna tir” and “a Cornishman” is just “Kernow.” (In the old Cornish texts unn was sometimes used to mean “a” but this is not usual in Revived Cornish).

### Exercise 3.

Using the words in exercises 1 and 2, translate the following into Cornish. Don’t forget that the words must be in first state.

1. A town.
2. A friend.
3. A woman.
4. A father.
5. A class.