---
title: "BRETEN² VYGHAN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Adjectives with singular nouns, yw, particle a"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-06T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false
draft: false
---


{{< audioGD 1kBWIGtvXnm_SjivaczPFjEed0qDaDUuD >}}

## BRETEN² VYGHAN

Breten² Vyghan yw bro² geltek. Rann an hweghkorn frynkek yw. Rewlys yw gans Pow Frynk. Yann yw Breton. Ev a² gews Bretonek. 
Ev a² gews Frynkek ynwedh. Bretonek yw y² vammyeth. Byttegyns ny² gews Bretonek marnas gans y² gowetha. 
Yann a² dhysk Kernewek dre lyther. Ev a skrif lytherow dhe Yowann yn Kernow. Yowann yw y² **gesskrifer, ha’y**² goweth.

Gerva

Nouns are normally shown in the first state (i.e. unmutated). They are masculine unless marked (f).

Breten² Vyghan Brittany
rann (f) part
hweghkorn hexagon
frynkek French
rewlys yw it is governed
Pow Frynk France
Yann Breton for John
Bretonek Breton language
Frynkek French language
byttegyns however
ny² gews does not speak
marnas except
ny... marnas only
gans with, by
y² his
kowetha friends
dre lyther by letter
a skrif writes
lytherow letters
dhe² to
kesskrifer penfriend,
correspondent
ha’y² and his
koweth friend


Govynnow

All the answers can be copied from the passage. Write complete sentences.

1) Pyth yw Breten² Vyghan? 
2) Pyth yw Yann? (What does Yann learn ?)
3) Pyth yw y² vammyeth? 
4) **P’eur** (when) kews ev Bretonek? 
5) **Pandr’a**² dhysk Yann?
6) **Pandr’a skrif Yann?**
7) Piw (who) yw y² gesskrifer?


Gramasek

A. Position of adjectives (describing words.
We have met the following:

Breten² Veur Great Britain
bro² geltek Celtic country
Breten² Vyghan Brittany
hweghkorn frynkek French hexagon

These examples show how in Cornish the adjective follows the noun it describes.
Here are five nouns, and five adjectives:

Nouns: kesskrifer correspondent, koweth comrade, friend, kothman friend, Kernow
Cornishman, Breton Breton.

Adjective: keltek Celtic, kernewek Cornish, byghan small, meur great, frynkek
French.

Exercise 1. Translate the following into Cornish. 
Remember to put the noun before _the adjective that describes it, and that usually there is no word for “a”.

1) a Celtic comrade
2) a French correspondent
3) a great Cornishman
4) a small Breton
5) a Cornish friend
6) a great comrade
7) a French friend
8) a small friend
9) a great Breton


B. Adjectives with feminine nouns. All the above are masculine. 
If we put adjectives with feminine nouns in the singular, then the adjective takes second state mutation.
Note that in Cornish all nouns, even those referring to sexless inanimate objects are either masculine or feminine.

Here are five feminine nouns:
benyn woman, rann part, mamm mother, hwoer sister, myrgh daughter.

Exercise 2. Translate the following into Cornish, remembering:

(a) the word for _“_ a _”_ is rarely used
(b) the noun comes first.
(c) the adjective takes second state mutation.

1) a Cornish woman
2) a little woman
3) a small part
4) a great sister
5) a Celtic woman
6) a little daughter
7) a little sister
8) a French woman
9) a French mother
10) a great part

C. The particle “a²”. You will have noticed that the word “a² ” precedes most of the verbs in the reading passage. 
These sentences start with the subject, a noun or pronoun and are described as “nominal”. 
In such sentences the verb stays the same if the sentence is affirmative, no matter what “person” the subject is. 
The particle “a² ” itself has no English meaning and is not translated but it causes second state mutation in the following verb.

Exercise 3. _Translate the following into Cornish, taking care to insert the “_ a² _” in_ front of each verb.

1) He lives in Cornwall. 
2) He speaks Cornish 
3) Yann learns Cornish.
4) He writes letters.

D. yw (is) This is the third person singular of the verb “to be”. It can mean “he is”, “she is”, or “it is”. 
When used in this way it is placed after the complement. (In the sentence “He is a Breton”, “a Breton” is the complement.)

e.g. Kernow yw He is a Cornishman. Breton yw He is a Breton.

Exercise 4. Translate into Cornish:

1) He is a great Cornishman.
2) He is a friend.
3) He is a member of the Cornish Language Fellowship.
4) He is a comrade.
5) He is his friend.
6) He is his correspondent.
7) She is a Cornish woman.
8) She is a great woman.
9) She is his daughter.
10) She is his sister.

Background note. Many Cornish people think of Cornwall as separate from England.
Similarly many Bretons think of Brittany as separate from France. 
For this reason the passage describes Brittany as part of the “French Hexagon” rather than of France itself.