---
title: "YOWANN HA JENIFER"
layout: kdlold
description: "Possession, yw and yma, to have"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-07T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false
draft: false
---




### YOWANN HA JENIFER
Yowann a² drig yn Truru gans y² **wreg ha’y**² deylu. Hanow y² wreg yw Jenifer. 
Yma dhedha mab, Peder y hanow, ha myrgh, Lowena hy hanow. 
Lowena yw pymthek bloedh, ha Peder yw dewdhek bloedh. Yma aga skol yn Truru. 
Yowann yw gwerther **lyvrow. Yma dhodho gwerthji y’n**² dre. 
Ev a² werth lyvrow kernewek ha keltek. Jenifer yw skrifennyades. 
Yma soed **hva Jenifer y’n**² dre ogas dhe² werthji Yowann. 
Hi a ober rag kowethas-surheans. Teylu pur lowen yns i!

{{< audioGD 1kBWIGtvXnm_SjivaczPFjEed0qDaDUuD >}}

### Gerva
ha and
Truru Truro
gwreg (f) wife
teylu family
hanow name
yma is, there is
dhedha to them
yma dhedha they have
mab son
myrgh (f) daughter
hy^3 her
pymthek fifteen
bloedh years old
dewdhek twelve
aga^3 their
skol (f) school
gwerther-lyvrow book-seller
dhodho to him
yma dhodho he has
gwerthji shop
y’n in the
ev a² werth he sells
lyvrow books
skrifennyades (f) secretary
dhedhi to her
yma dhedhi she has
soedhva (f) office
ogas dhe² near
hi a ober she works
rag for
kowethas-surheans insurance company
pur² very
lowen happy
yns i they are

### Govynnow
All answers except 3 and 4 can be copied from the passage. 3 and 4 should be modelled on 2.

1) Ple trig Yowann? 
2) Pyth yw hanow y² wreg? 
3) Pyth yw hanow y² vab? 
4) Pyth yw hanow y² vyrgh?
5) **Ple’ma** (where is) aga skol?
6) Pyth yw Yowann?
7) **Pandr’a**² werth ev?
8) Pyth yw Jenifer?
9) **Ple’ma** hy soedhva?

### Gramasek

#### A. Possession. 
This is usually shown in English by an apostrophe “s”, e.g. his wife’s name, Jenifer’s office, Yowann’s shop.
But sometimes the word “of” is used, e.g. a seller of books, the Queen of England.
This second English method is the best guide to the Cornish way of showing possession. 
The thing possessed is placed before the person/thing that possesses it, but there is no word for “of”.

e.g. 
- hanow y² wreg / his wife’s name - (name (of) his wife) 
- soedhva Jenifer / Jenifer’s office - (office Jenifer) 
- gwerthji Yowann / Yowann’s shop - (shop Yowann)


### Dyskans Tri 2

#### Exercise 1. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) Yowann’s shop 
2) Yowann’s wife 
3) Jenifer’s son 
4) Jenifer’s daughter 
5) Yann’s books 
6) Yann’s friend
7) Lowena’s name
8) Lowena’s letters
9) Peder’s office
10) Peder’s town

### B. yw and yma.
- Yw means ‘is’. Yma means ‘is’ or ‘there is’. 
- Yma must be used to show where a thing/person is. 
- Yw shows who, what, or how it is. 
- Yma usually starts the sentence.

e.g. 
- Yma aga skol yn Truru. / There is their school in Truro,
(or, in more natural English, Their school is in Truro.)

- **Yma soedhva Jenifer y’n**² dre. / There is Jenifer’s office in the town.
(Jenifer’s office is in the town.)

#### Exercise 2. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) Yowann is in Cornwall.
2) Yann is in Brittany. 
3) Jenifer is in Truro 
4) Lowena is in the school. 
5) Peder is in the shop. 
6) Truro is in Cornwall.
7) There is a Cornishman in the school.
8) There is a school in Truro
9) Rennes is in Brittany.
10) Cornwall is in Britain.

### C. ‘To have’.
A common way of expressing ‘have’ in Cornish is to use yma followed by dhe² followed by the English subject, i.e. the person/thing that has something.

e.g. 
- Yma gwreg dhe Yowann. / Yowann has a wife  - (There is a wife to Y.)
- Yma soedhva dhe Jenifer. / Jenifer has an office - (There is an office to J.)

#### Exercise 3. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) Yowann has a wife. 
2) Jenifer has an office. 
3) Yann has (some) letters. 
4) Peder has a school. 
5) Lowena has a mother. 
6) The secretary has some books.
7) Yowann has a shop.
8) Yann has a friend.
9) Yowann has a pen-friend.
10) Jenifer has a son.

The word ‘some’ is omitted in Cornish.

**dhe** combines with the words for ‘he’, ‘she’ and ‘they’ to form:

- dhodho to him
- dhedhi to her
- dhedha to them

so that 
- ‘he has’ becomes yma dhodho, 
- ‘she has’ becomes yma dhedhi,
- ‘they have’ becomes yma dhedha.

e.g. he has a daughter yma myrgh dhodho.

#### Exercise 4. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) He has a daughter. 
2) She has a friend. 
3) They have (some) books.
4) He has a shop.
5) She has an office.
6) They have a correspondent.