---
title: "YANN HAG ANJELA"
layout: kdlold
description: "Definite article, mutation, yma dhe , word order, negative particle, ny²^"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-08T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false
draft: false
---


{{< audioGD 1kBWIGtvXnm_SjivaczPFjEed0qDaDUuD >}}


## YANN HAG* ANJELA

**Yann a**² **drig yn chi byghan ogas dhe’n mor. Pyskador yw Yann. Yma gwreg dhe Yann,
Anjela hy hanow. Hi a ober yn koffiji yn Sen Malo. Yma’n koffiji a-berth yn fosow an**² **dre.
Dhe Yann hag Anjela yma mab ha myrgh. An mab yw Erwan ha’n**² **vyrgh yw Marie.
Erwan yw studhyer orth Pennskol Roazhon ha Marie yw servyades y’n koffiji gans hy
mamm. Pub mis po dew Yann a**² **dhannvon lyther dhe Yowann yn Kernewek. Ny**² **woer
Yann Sowsnek, ny**² **woer Yowann na Frynkek na Bretonek. Ny**² **yllons kesskrifa marnas yn
Kernewek.**

* **ha** (“and”) adds “ **g** ” when followed by a vowel.

**Gerva
chi** house **pub** every
**byghan** small **mis** month
**pyskador** fisherman **po** or
**koffiji** café **dew** two
**Sen Malo** St Malo **a**² **dhannvon** sends
**a-berth yn** inside **ny**² **wor** does not know
**fosow** walls **na....na** neither...nor
**studhyer** student **ny**² **yllons** they cannot
**pennskol** (f) university **kesskrifa** (to) correspond
**Roazhon** Rennes (Breton form) **mor** sea
**servyades** (f) waitress

**Govynnow**

_All the answers, except those marked* can be copied from the passage._

1) **Ple trig Yann?**
2) **Ple ma’n chi?**
3) **Pyth yw Yann?**
4) **Pyth yw hanow gwreg Yann?***
5) **Pleth (where) ober Anjela?**
6) **Ple’ma’n koffiji?**
7) **Pyth yw hanow mab Yann hag Anjela?***
8) **Pyth yw hanow myrgh Yann hag Anjela?***
9) **Pyth yw Erwan?**
10) **Pandr’a**² **dhannvon Yann dhe Yowann?**
(“ **Pleth** ” is used instead of “ **Ple** ” before a vowel)


**Gramasek**

A. The Definite Article. In English this is the word “the”. 
In Cornish it is “ **an** ” and we have met it several times already though often joined to the previous word:
e.g. **y’n** (in the); **ha’n** (and the)

This word always causes second state mutation in the following noun when it is feminine singular: 
e.g. 
**myrgh** (daughter) **an**² **vyrgh** (the daughter)
**tre** (town) **an**² **dre** (the town)

_Exercise l. All the following nouns are feminine. 

Write_ **_an_**² _in front of them making the second state mutation where necessary, and then translate._

1) **tre** (2) **myrgh** (3) **benyn** (4) **hwoer** (5) **servyades**
6) **gwreg** (7) **skrifennyades** (8) **bro** (9) **kowethes (female friend)**
(10) **mammyeth**

B. Negative particle **ny**². This replaces **a**² before a verb when it is negative, i.e. when “not”, “does not” etc. is used in English.
e.g. **Yann ny**² **woer Sowsnek** Yann does not know English. **Yowann ny**² **woer Frynkek** Yowann does not know French.
Like “ **a**² ” it causes second state mutation.

When a sentence becomes negative it ceases to be a “nominal” sentence and becomes a “verbal” one. 
In such sentences the verb ending alters to agree with or indicate the subject so that **ny**² can be used in this way only when the subject is 3rd person singular, i.e. a singular noun or a 3rd person singular pronoun. 

When the subject is not one of these it has to follow the noun. Verbal sentences will be dealt with more fully later.

_Exercise 2. Make the following sentences negative, i.e. replace the_ **_a_**² _with_ **_ny_**² _and then translate into English. The mutation will remain in the second state, 
e.g._
**_Yowann a_**² **_gews Frynkek>Yowann ny_**² **_gews Frynkek_** _Yowann does not speak French._

1) **Yowann a**² **drig ogas dhe Sen Malo**.
2) **Marie a**² **ober y’n koffiji.**
3) **Anjela a**² **dhannvon lyther dhe Yowann**
4) **Yann a**² **werth lyvrow.**
5) **Jenyfer a**² **gews Frynkek**.

This is a simple way to make a nominal sentence negative but it places exceptionally strong
emphasis on the subject and is therefore quite unusual. The neutral, and by far the most common,
way to make a sentence negative is to use **ny**² in the same way but to put the subject after the
verb, e.g.
**Yowann a**² **woer Bretonek>Ny**² **woer Yowann Bretonek** Yowann does not know Breton.

**It is therefore important that you become accustomed to starting negative sentences with
the negative particle, as in the following exercise.**


_Exercise 3. Using this method put the following sentences into the negative and translate._

1) **Yowann a**² **dhysk Frynkek.**
2) **Yann a**² **skrif lytherow.**
3) **Anjela a**² **woer Sowsnek.**
4) **Erwan a**² **woer Kernewek.**
5) **Marie a**² **skrif dhe Yowann.**

C. More mutations. You will have noticed that a number of short words cause second state
mutation. So far we have met:
**dhe**² (to, at) **a**² (verb particle) **ny**² (negative particle) **y**² (his)

_Exercise 4. Translate the following into Cornish keeping a special lookout for these mutations:_

1) Wella lives near a café.
2) He speaks Breton.
3) His daughter learns Cornish.
4) His son works near a shop.
5) His wife does not know French.
6) He sends letters to Brittany.
7) The woman works in the café.
8) The secretary speaks English.
9) She speaks Cornish.
10) Yann does not learn English.

D. To have. We saw in dyskans 3 how the idea of having something is often expressed by “ **Yma....dhe** ”. 
“ **Yma....gans** ” can be similarly used when there is a looser association rather than actual possession:
e.g. **Yma ki gans Peder** Peter has a dog with him.

Like **dhe** , **gans** combines with pronouns to make (e.g.): **ganso** with him **gensi** with her **gansa** with them.

_Exercise 5. Translate into Cornish:_

1) He has a letter with him.
2) Yowann has some friends with him.
3) Anjela has Marie with her.
4) He has got the books with him.
5) Where are the letters? With Erwan.

E. Word order. Notice the sentence “ **Pyskador yw Yann** ”. This conveys the same information as “ **Yann yw pyskador** ” i.e. 
“Yann is a fisherman” but placing the “ **pyskador** ” first emphasises this word - Yann is a fisherman, nothing else. 
The flexibility of word order and the variable emphases that can be obtained is a feature of Cornish.


