---
title: "KYNSA LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Past tense of Verbs, the Verb-Noun"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-10T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
data: "210103"
withaudio: false
draft: false
---


{{< audioGD 1kBWIGtvXnm_SjivaczPFjEed0qDaDUuD >}}


## KYNSA LYTHER YANN

A Yowann ker,
My re² **dhegemmeras dha drigva dhiworth “K.D.L.” ha pur lowen ov vy** dhe skrifa dhis. Pyskador ov vy hag yma dhymm gwreg, Anjela hy hanow, mab, Erwan y hanow, ha myrgh, Marie hy hanow. My a² **dhysk Kernewek gans “K.D.L.” ha my a**² wayt ty dhe² alloes konvedhes ow lyther. Ow mammyeth yw Bretonek, mes ny² allav kewsel Bretonek marnas gans ow^3 howetha. Ow g **wreg ha’n fleghes ny**² gewsons saw Frynkek. Skrif dhymm yn skon, mar pleg. 
Dhiso yn lel,
Yann le Bars.

Gerva
**“A”** is a vocative particle, not translated
ker dear
my I
re² dhegemmeras have received
dha² your
(pronounce as Eng. “the”)
trigva (f) address
dhiworth from
ov vy I am
skrifa (to) write
dhis to you
a² wayt hope
ty you
ty dhe² alloes that you can
konvedhes (to) understand
lyther letter
mes but
ny² allav I cannot
kewsel (to) speak
ha’n and the
fleghes children
skrif dhymm write to me
yn skon soon
mar pleg please
dhiso yn lel yours sincerely
ny² gewsons saw (they) only speak


Govynnow
_Answer in complete sentences as before. None of the answers can be “lifted” from the passage but in many cases you can base most of the wording on the questions.

1) Piw a skrif an lyther?
2) Piw re ros (has given) trigva Yowann dhe Yann?
3) Prag (Why) yth yw Yann pur lowen?
4) Piw yw Anjela?
5) Piw yw Erwan?
6) Piw yw Marie?
7) Fatell² dhysk Yann Kernewek?
8) Py yeth a² gews Anjela? (What language does Anjela speak?)
9) **P’eur kews Yann Bretonek?**
10) Pyth yw hanow teylu Yann?


Gramasek

A. Past Tense of Verbs.

“My re² dhegemmeras” illustrates the common ending **“** - as” for the past tense of verbs. It can be used with the usual particle a²
e.g. My a² dhegemmeras I received.

or with the perfect particle re²
e.g. My re² dhegemmeras I have received.

Similarly for verbs we have met so far:
My a² drig I live My a² drigas I lived My re² drigas I have lived
My a² gews I speak My a² gewsis I spoke My re² gewsis I have spoken
My a² skrif I write My a² skrifas I wrote My re skrifas I have written
My a² werth I sell My a² werthas I sold My re² werthas I have sold
My a² dhannvon I send My a² dhannvonas I sent My re² dhannvonas I have sent
My a² woer I know My a² wodhva I knew My re² wodhva I have known
(This verb is irregular)

A number of verbs end in **“** - **is”** instead of **“** - as” in the past tense:
e.g. My a² gewsis I spoke Yann a² gewsis Yann spoke.

Remember these forms are used no matter what the subject is, so long as it starts the sentence to form a nominal sentence.
e.g. Ni re skrifas We have written Yowann a oberas John worked.

Exercise 1. Translate the following into Cornish, checking carefully with the above list.

1) He speaks. 
2) She spoke. 
3) Marie has spoken.
4) He has written. 
5) I have sent. 
6) Jenifer sent.
7) The Cornishman works.
8) He has worked.
9) Yann has lived in St. Malo.
10) She sold.

B. Past Tense in the Negative.
The negative particle ny² is similarly used with the past tense and replaces both a² and re² to make the verb negative. There is no distinction in Cornish between the simple past and the perfect when the verb is negative so that:
e.g. Yann ny skrifas “ means Yann did not write” and also “Yann has not written” Ny² werthas Yann means “Yann did not sell” and also “Yann has not sold”

Negative sentences are not nominal but verbal, and usually emphasise the verb by putting it in front of the subject. Also, the verb ending alters to agree with the subject. This is why we have “ **gewsons”** in the last but one line of the letter, because the subject (“ **Ow gwreg ha’n**
fleghes”) is plural. When the subject comes first in a verbal sentence it carries some degree of emphasis. However if a noun subject follows the verb, the verb stays singular. The last but one sentence could have been “ **Ny gews ow gwreg ha’n fleghes saw Frynkek.”**


Exercise 2. Translate into Cornish. Remember that both the _“have not” and the “did not”_ sentences simply need ny² in front of the verb with the past tense ending, usually **_“_** - **_as”._** Put the subject first (e.g. Ev ny² gewsis He did not speak) in numbers 1 - 5, and after the verb
(e.g. Ny² dhannvonas hi She did not send.) in 6 - 10.


1) Yann has not written. 
2) Anjela did not speak. 
3) The friend did not send. 
4) The Breton has not spoken. 
5) The Cornishman did not speak. 
6) John has not sent.
7) Jenifer did not write.
8) The family has not written.
9) The woman did not sell.
10) The sister has not spoken.


(You will observe that in this exercise all the subjects are third person singular as this is the only verb ending we have so far learned.)

C. The Infinitive or Verb-Noun.
The term “infinitive” is the normal one in the grammar of English and most European languages, but “Verb-Noun” or “Verbal Noun” is frequently used in connection with Celtic languages. In English this is the verb usually preceded by the particle “to” e.g. “to speak,” “to write,” etc. However this is not the case in the example in Yann’s letter. “Ny² allav kewsel” “I cannot speak” shows the verb noun “kewsel” and the infinitive “speak” without its usual “to” though “I am able to speak.” is also possible in English.

The Cornish verb-noun forms for the verbs we have met so far are:

kewsel to speak

skrifa to write

oberi to work

bos to be 

triga to dwell 

gwertha to sell,

mos to go 

degemmeres to receive 

dyski to learn,

godhvos to know 

dannvon to send

D. I can / cannot.
We have learned above “Ny² allav,” the Cornish for “I cannot.” The Cornish for “I can” is “Y^5 hallav” so with this information we can now do the following exercise:

Exercise 3. Translate into Cornish:

(e.g. I can go = Y^5 hallav mos; I cannot work = Ny² allav oberi.)

1) I can sell. 
2) I cannot go. 
3) I cannot send. 
4) I can live in Gt. Britain. 
5) I can write the letter. 
6) I cannot write books.
7) I can go to Brittany.
8) I cannot be in Cornwall.
9) I cannot live in France.
10) I can send the children.


“Y^5 hallav” implies that “I can” because I am physically able or because I am allowed. If “I can” implies that I have learned to do something it is more usual to use “Y^5 hwonn, “ or “My a² woer,” both of which mean literally “I know (how to).” “My a² woer” is nominal and emphasises “I.” In the case of the verbal expression “Y^5 hwonn,” the emphasis is neutral.

e.g. Y^5 hwonn lywya karr tan I can drive a car.
My a² woer lywya karr tan I can drive a car.


Exercise 4. Translate into Cornish _using “_ Y^5 hwonn _,” or “_ My a² woer _.”_

1) I can write English. 
2) I can speak Cornish. 
3) I can read (redya) Breton. 
4) I can speak French. 
5) I can speak English. 
6) I can speak Breton.
7) I can read French.
8) I can write Cornish.
9) I can speak French.
10) I can speak Cornish.

E. Verb-Noun with Adjective.

The Verb-Noun is often used with an adjective (describing word)

e.g. I am sad to go. He is happy to stay.

In Cornish the verb-noun has the word dhe² in front of it in a sentence of this kind.

e.g. 
Lowen ov vy dhe skrifa dhis I am happy to write to you.
Trist yns i dhe² vos They are sad to go.

Exercise 5. 
_Translate the following into Cornish. Don’t forget that “_ dhe² **_”_** always causes second state mutation.

1) I am happy to learn Cornish 
2) I am sad to go away*. 
3) They are happy to live in Truro. 
4) They are sad to live in France. 
5) I am happy to sell books. 
6) They are happy to work.
7) I am happy to speak Cornish.
8) They are sad to write letters.
9) I am happy to go to Brittany.
10) They are happy to be in Yowann’s shop.

(*to go away mos dhe² - ves)


