---
title: "GORTHYP YOWANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Subject pronouns and combinations with gans and dhe"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-11T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---

## GORTHYP YOWANN

A Yann Ker,
**Gonn meur ras dhis a’th lyther. Pur lowen ynwedh vydhav dhe**² gesskrifa genes.
Gwerther lyvrow ov vy gans gwerthji omma yn Truru. Hanow ow gwreg yw Jenifer hag yma dhyn mab ha myrgh. Hanow an mab yw Peder ha hanow an² vyrgh yw Lowena. Ni a² drig yn chi ogas ha kilometer dhiworth kres an² dre.
Pur² dhe les yw dha² vos pyskador. Treweythyow my a² breder y karsen gul **neppyth a’n par na yn kok war an mor. Da yw genev redya bos mab ha myrgh dhywgh** hwi, kepar dell eus mab ha myrgh dhyn ni. Agan fleghes a² **wra mos dhe skol y’n**² dre.
**Ow mammyeth yw Sowsnek heb mar. Nyns eus denvydh y’n eur ma ha gan** so Kernewek avel mammyeth, mes yma nebes teyluyow yn Kernow a² dhysk Kernewek **avel mammyeth dh’aga fleghes.
Skrif dhymm arta mar pleg, ow leverel dhymm neppyth a’th ober ha neppyth moy a’th teylu.


Gorhemmynnadow a’th kesskrifer lel,
Yowann Polglas.

Gerva
**Gonn meur ras dhis a’th lyther** nebes a few
Thank you very much for your letter teyluyow families
bos mab ha myrgh dhywgh hwi avel as
that you have a son and daughter kok fishing boat
dhywgh hwi to you war² on
vydhav I shall be da yw genev I am glad
genes with you redya to read
omma here kepar dell² as, like ( + verb)
ow^3 my kepar dell eus mab ha myrgh dhyn ni
genen with us as we (too) have a son and daughter
ni we yma nebes teyluyow a² dhysk
ogas ha about (with number) there are some families that teach
kilometer kilometre ow leverel dhymm neppyth
kres centre telling me something
dhe les interesting **a’th ober** of your work
dha² vos pyskador that you are a fisherman a² dhysk learn/teach
treweythyow sometimes dyski to learn/teach
a² breder think agan our
prederi to think a wra mos (do) go
y karsen I would like heb mar of course
kara to like/love nyns eus denvydh there is no one
gul to do **y’n eur ma** at the present time
**neppyth a’n par na** something like that aga^3 their
ha ganso Kernewek avel mammyeth arta again
with Cornish as his mother tongue **moy a’th teylu** more about your family
gorhemmynnadow greetings


### Govynnow
Answers 6 and 7 can be “lifted” from the letter. 

For the rest use the wording of the question to guide you.

1) Pyth yw Yowann? 
2) **Ple’ma gwerthji Yowann?** 
3) Pyth yw hanow gwreg Yowann? 
4) Ple trig Yowann ha Jenifer? 
5) Pyth yw mammyeth Yowann?
6 ) Piw a² gews Kernewek avel mammyeth?
7) Piw a² dhysk Kernewek avel mammyeth?
8) Pyth yw hanow teylu Yowann?

### Gramasek

#### A. Personal Pronouns.
We have already met a number of these. Here is a complete list in the subject case:

my I 
ty you (sing.) 
ev he/it 
hi she/it
ni we
hwi you (plural)
i they

Modern English has only one word for “you” whether one person or more is addressed. 
Like most other languages, Cornish has two words for “you,” ty for the singular form and hwi for
the plural. 

Sometimes this is used as a “polite form of address” for only one person but this is dying out in modern use.

These pronouns are used with the particles a² or re² as the subject of a nominal sentence.

e.g. 
- My a² gewsis I spoke 
- Hi a² woer She knows.
- Ev re skrifas He has written.

#### Exercise 1. 
Translate the following into Cornish. The verb is always as shown in Dyskans 6.

1) I think. 
2) We send. 
3) They have written.
4) She sells. 
5) You (s.) worked. 
6) You (p.) spoke.
7) We have lived.
8) He has sent.
9) You (s.) write.
10) She has spoken.

(We have not yet learned how to make sentences with pronoun subjects, like these, negative. This will be dealt with later.)

#### B. Gans combined with personal pronouns.

We have seen examples of this:

e.g. 
- genev with me.
- genes with you.
- genen with us.

Here is now a list of all such combinations:
- genev with me 
- genes with you (sing.) 
- ganso with him/it 
- gensi with her/it
- genen with us
- genowgh with you (plur.)
- gansa with them

#### Exercise 2. Translate the following into Cornish:

1) I have a daughter with me. 
2) She has a friend with her. 
3) We correspond with him. 
4) The family is with us. 
5) Are you glad you read the letter? 
6) You have the books.  _(But don’t own them!)_
7) They have their sister with them.
8) I have their children. _(They’re not mine!)_
9) The fishing boat is with him.
l0) The children are with us.


#### C. Dhe combined with personal pronouns.

We have already met one or two examples of this, such as dhymm (to me) and dhis (to you).

Here is a complete list:

dhymm to me 
dhis to you (s.)
dhodho to him/it  
dhedhi to her/it
dhyn to us
dhywgh to you (p.)
dhedha to them


Pronouns may be added to these for greater emphasis, as is done in the letter. 

e.g.
Da yw genev redya bos mab ha myrgh dhywgh hwi kepar dell eus mab ha myrgh dhyn ni.

I am glad to read that you have a son and daughter, just as we have a son and daughter.

#### Exercise 3. 
Use these combinations to translate the following:

1) Write a letter to me. 
2) I wrote to you. 
3) We have a letter. (see Dysk. 3)
4) Write to us please. 
5) She has a letter. 
6) They sent the books to us.
7) We have written to her.
8) She has sent (to) us a letter.
9) We have a son.
10) He has a father and mother.