---
title: "KYNSA LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Vocative Particle A² , Gul, Mos, Numbers 1-10,"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-12T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---


ANJELA
Dhe Anjela yma ‘dew vargh.’ Hi a**² wra devnydh anodho rag lavurya gans Marie dhe’n koffiji yn Sen Malo. I a² wra mos ena pub gorthugher, hag i a² wra oberi y’n koffiji bys yn eur dhiwedhes.

An² brenoryon y’n koffiji a² wra leverel, “Gorthugher da, Anjela. My a² garsa eva korev, mar pleg,” 
po
“My a**² garsa eva gwin kemmyn, mar pleg,” po

“My a**² garsa eva koffi, mar pleg.”


Anjela a² worthyp, “Pur² dha, A² vester.” (Pur² gortes yw hi!)
Wor’tiwedh, Anjela ha Marie a² wra dehweles tre. Gwag yw an chi. Yann res eth dhe² byskessa. Treweythyow, pan nag usi ev ow pyskessa, ev a² wra mos dhe’n koffiji y honan, ha’n tri a² wra kinyewel warbarth y’n koffiji, kyns i dhe² dhehweles tre y’n karr-tan ha mos dhe² goska.

Gerva
dew² vargh 2 CV (car)
a² wra does/makes
devnydh use
anodho of it
rag lavurya (in order) to travel
a² wra mos go
ena there
gorthugher evening
a² wra oberi work
bys yn until
eur² dhiwedhes a late hour
an² brenoryon the customers
a² wra leverel say
Gorthugher da Good evening
my a² garsa eva I would like to drink
korev beer
gwin wine
kemmyn ordinary
gwin kemmyn vin ordinaire
koffi coffee
a² worthyp answers

```
pur² dha very well
A² vester sir
kortes polite
wor’tiwedh at last
a² wra dehweles return
tre (f) home
gwag empty
res eth has gone
pyskessa to fish
pan nag usi ev ow pyskessa
when he is not fishing
y honan himself
tri three
a² wra kinyewel dine
warbarth together
kyns i dhe² dhehweles
before they return
karr-tan motor car
ha mos dhe² goska and go to sleep
p’eur^5? when?
```
### Govynnow
As always, answer in complete sentences. 
The question itself usually gives the best guide to the wording of the answer.


1) Py par karr tan eus dhe Anjela? (What kind of car does Anjela have?)
2) Piw a² wra devnydh an² dhew vargh?
3) Piw a² wra mos dhe Sen Malo gensi?
4) Piw a² **wra leverel “Gorthugher da!”?**
5) Fatell² worthyp Anjela dhedha?
6) **P’eur**^5 hwra Anjela dehweles tre?
7) Fatell yw an chi?
8) **Pandr’a**² wra Yann pan nag usi ow pyskessa?
9) **Pandr’a**² **wra Yann, Anjela ha Marie y’n koffiji?**
10) Fatell² wra an tri dehweles tre?

### Gramasek

#### A. The Vocative Particle A².
The use of this is optional before the name or title of a person addressed

e.g. 
A² vester! Sir!

It causes second state mutation to common nouns and preceding adjectives but not to proper
nouns, i.e. individual names of people.

#### B. The verb gul to make/do.
a² wra, which appears frequently in this passage, is the 3rd. sing. present tense of gul.


e.g. Hi a² wra devnydh She makes use.

Like the verb “do” in English, gul is used as an auxiliary verb to make alternative forms of other verbs, by putting it in front of the verb noun,

e.g. 
- I a² wra mos They do go (They go)
- Ty a² wra oberi You do work (You work)

#### Exercise 1. 

Using a² wra plus verb-nouns, translate the following into Cornish:

1) Anjela goes to St. Malo. 
2) We speak Cornish. 
3) The family works in the shop. 
4) Yowann writes in Cornish. 
5) Erwan works in Rennes. 
6) Yann fishes.
7) Marie travels with Anjela.
8) She likes the café.
9) They live in Truro.
10) Yowann sells books.

So long as the subject is 3rd. sing, such sentences can be made negative by using ny² with wra and putting the ny² wra before or after the subject, though to put it before the subject is more usual.

e.g. 
Ny² wra Yann triga yn Truru = Yann ny² wra triga yn Truru
Yann does not live in Truro

#### Exercise 2. 
Translate the following into Cornish. 

Put Ny² wra in front of the subject innumbers 1-3, and after the subject in 4-5.

1) Peder does not work. 
2) Anjela does not fish. 
3) Lowena does not sell books.
4) Erwan does not speak Breton.
5) The family does not write letters to Yowann.

#### C. The verb mos (to go).
The 3rd person sing. present tense of mos is a. 

We met it in Dyskans 1.
e.g. Ev a dhe² glas He goes to a class.

The 3rd person sing. past tense occurs in this lesson:
e.g. Yann res eth dhe² byskessa Yann has gone to fish.

Note carefully the following points:
1) The particle a² is omitted before a (“goes”) and before eth (“went.”)
2) The perfect particle re² becomes res in front of eth.
3) The negative particle ny² becomes nyns in front of a and eth.
4) A verb-noun following a part of mos is preceded by dhe² as in the example above.

#### Exercise 3. 
Using a² and eth translate the following into Cornish:

1) Yowann goes to a class. 
2) Jenifer does not go to a class. 
3) Yann has gone to fish. 
4) Anjela has not gone to fish. 
5) He goes to the shop. 
6) We go to the café.
7) Peder has gone to school.
8) Lowena has not gone to school.
9) She has gone in the car.
5) He goes to the shop. 


#### D. Numbers.

We have met a few numbers already. Here are the numbers 1 - 10.

1. onan; unn. 
2. dew; diw. 
3. tri; teyr. 
4. peswar; peder. 
5. pymp. 
6. hwegh.
7. seyth.
8. eth.
9. naw.
10. deg.


There are several points to notice:

1) Onan (one) is used by itself, 

e.g. when counting, but it becomes unn when followed by a noun which takes second state mutation if it is feminine.

e.g. 
- unn mab one son 
- unn² vyrgh one daughter


2) Dew², tri^3 and peswar have the forms diw² , teyr^3 , and peder when followed by a feminine noun.

e.g. 
- dew² vab two sons 
- diw² vyrgh two daughters

- tri mab three sons 
- teyr myrgh three daughters

- peswar mab four sons 
- peder myrgh four daughters


3) When dew² and diw² are preceded by an² they take second state mutation themselves.

e.g. 
- an² dhew² vab the two sons 
- an² dhiw² vyrgh the two daughters


4) tri^3 and teyr^3 are followed by third state mutation.

e.g. 
- tri^3 howeth three friends 
- teyr^3 hartenn three cards


5) Any noun following a number stays in the singular.

e.g. 
- unn lyther = one letter 
- pymp lyther = five letters



#### Exercise 4. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) Ten Cornishmen. 
2) Three sons. 
3) Four daughters. 
4) One woman. 
5) The two cafés. 
6) The two daughters.
7) Three cars.
8) Three comrades.
9) Two sons.
10) One house.