---
title: "KYNSA LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Past tense of Verbs, the Verb-Noun"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-15T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---





Dhe² with gul and preceding object, Plural of Nouns, Adjectives with Masculine
Plural Nouns, Present Participle, Use of Ha, Word Order


# DY’ SUL

Dy’ Sul, Erwan re² dhrehedhas tre rag an² bennseythun. Pur skwith yw ev wosa studhya y’n² Bennskol dres an seythun. Yethow keltek a² wra ev dhe studhya, an yeth² vretonek, an yeth kembrek ha’n yeth kernewek. Unnek eur myttinweyth yw hi.

Anjela: Erwan, esosta ow sevel hedhyw? Unnek eur yw! 

Yann: Gas ev dhe² goska. Owth oberi yth esa bys yn diw eur myttinweyth. Res yw dhodho ri dew skrif hir dh’y² dhyskador a-vorow.

Marie: Pur² dhiek yw ev. Prag na² wrug ev y skrifow kyns? Nans yw unn mis y^5 feu leverys dhodho aga gul.

Anjela: Yv dha² goffi, Marie. Pur² vysi yw Erwan. Skrifennyas Kowethas Bretonek an² Bennskol yw ev lemmyn.

Marie: Dar! Pur² vysi yw ev ow kwari peldroes yn le studhya!

Yann: Na² wra argya yn y² gever. Ottava lemmyn.

Erwan: Myttin da, oll an bys! Eus koffi? Pur skwith ov vy. Lyver my re² gollas.

Angela: Py lyver?

Erwan: Lyver sowsnek yn kever Kernewek.

Marie: Ottava gans dha lyvrow erell war-lergh an² bellwolok.

### Gerva
drehedhes to reach
tre f (trevow) home(s)
pennseythun f weekend
skwith tired
wosa after
studhya to study
wosa studhya after studying
dres during
seythun f week
yethow languages
yeth f language
unnek eleven
myttinweyth in the morning
esosta ow sevel? are you getting up?
hedhyw today
gas ev dhe² goska let him sleep
owth oberi yth esa he was working
bys yn until.
res yw dhodho he has to
ri (to) give
skrif writing, essay.
hir long
a-vorow tomorrow
diek lazy
prag na² wrug ev? why didn’t he do?
skrifow essays
kyns before
y^5 feu leverys dhodho he was told
aga gul to do them
nans yw unn mis a month ago
yv dha² goffi drink your coffee
skrifennyas secretary (male)
lemmyn now
Dar! Rubbish!
ow^4 kwari playing
peldroes football
yn le instead of
na² wra argya don’t quarrel
yn y² gever (yn kever) about him
ottava here he is
myttin da! good morning!
oll an bys everybody
eus koffi? is there any coffee?
pur skwith ov vy I am very tired
my re² gollas I have lost
kelli to lose
erell other (plural)
war-lergh behind
pellwolok f television
ro! give! (imperative)
henwyn names
soedh f job, position
herwydh according to
kellys lost


### Govynnow
No further hints will be given on how to answer the questions. You will have realised that sometimes an answer can be found complete in the passage, sometimes just a word or two needs to be changed, sometimes the wording of the answer can be found in the question with just a few words taken from the passage. The main thing is to use common sense to seek out this help that is available rather than thinking up (in English!) an entirely different answer, and then wondering why we cannot put it into Cornish! It is always best to give a written answer in the form of a sentence, and this gives practice in writing Cornish, which will help towards fluency in speech also.


1) Py dydh y^5 trehedhas Erwan tre?
2) Prag yth yw ev skwith?
3) Pandr’a² wra ev dhe studhya? (See “Gramasek,” first section)
4) Ro henwyn teyr yeth keltek.
5) Py eur yw pan elow (calls) Anjela dhe Erwan?
6) Prag y^5 hwrug Erwan oberi bys yn diw eur myttinweyth?
7) P’eur^5 feu leverys dhe Erwan gul an² dhew skrif?
8) Pyth yw soedh Erwan y’n² Bennskol?
9) Prag yth yw pur² vysi, herwydh Marie?
10) Ple’ma’n lyver kellys?


### Gramasek

#### A. Dhe² with “gul” and preceding object. 

“Yethow keltek a² wra ev dhe studhya”.


This sentence starts with the object “yethow keltek” to give it some emphasis, and “gul” is used as an auxiliary verb. 

In such a case dhe² is inserted before the verb noun “studhya.” 

Question 3 is another example of this where the preceding object is the interrogative pronoun Pandra? What? 

Other examples are:
- Kernewek a² wra ev dhe² dhyski. He learns Cornish.
- Y lytherow a² wra hi dhe redya She reads his letters.
-  Pandr’a² wra ev dhe leverel? What does he say?


### Exercise 1. 
Translate the following into Cornish as in the above examples by putting the object first and using gul as an auxiliary followed by dhe² and the verb noun to express the English verb.


1) He learns Cornish. 
2) He drinks beer. 
3) He sells books
4) What does he read? 
5) He reads Cornish books.

Of course, such sentences can also be expressed with a more neutral emphasis by putting the subject first 

e.g. 
Ev a² wra dyski Kernewek He learns Cornish.

Question 3 may be answered by either method.


#### B. Plural of Nouns.
In English, the vast majority of nouns are made plural by adding s or es.

e.g. 
- boy - boys 
- girl - girls
- glass - glasses
- dish - dishes

But one or two very common nouns preserve the older ending “-en.”

e.g. 
- child - children; 
- woman – women.


And we have one or two oddities like 

- mouse - mice; 
- goose - geese.

Unfortunately, the plural of Cornish nouns is not so simple and we have to be familiar with the plural form of each noun as it comes. However, there are some fairly common endings such as “-ow” which we have met in this lesson:


- yeth (language); yethow (languages): 
- skrif (essay); skrifow (essays).

Here is a list of most of the nouns we have met so far in singular and plural.

| Singular |Plural| Meaning |
| Kernow | Kernowyon | Cornishman |
| bro f | broyow | country |
| esel | eseli|  member |
| kowethas | kowethasow | society |
| rann f |  rannow | part |
| lyther | lytherow | letter |
| kesskrifer | kesskriforyon | correspondent |
| koweth | kowetha | friend |
| gwreg f | gwragedh | wife |
| teylu | teyluyow | family |
| hanow | henwyn | name |
| mab | mebyon | son |
| myrgh f | myrghes | daughter |
| skol f | skolyow | school |
| gwerthji | gwerthjiow | shop |
| soedhva f | soedhvaow | office |
| chi | chiow | house |
| pyskador | pyskadoryon | fisherman |
| fos f | fosow|  wall |
| studhyer | studhyoryon|  student |
| pennskol f | pennskolyow | university |
| mis | misyow | month |
| trigva f | trigvaow | address |
| flogh | fleghes|  child |
| gorthyp | gorthybow | answer |
| kok | kokow | fishing boat |
| ober | oberow | job |
| karr-tan | kerri-tan | motor car |
| diwotti | diwottiow | pub |
| den | tus | man (p1ural “people”) |
| dyskador | dyskadoryon | teacher |
| lyver | lyvrow | book |


They are masculine, except those marked f.

It is not suggested that you should learn all these now, but the following exercise should help start the process!


### Exercise 2. 
Write out the above nouns in singular and plural, with “an” in front.

Remember this causes second state mutation of all feminine singular nouns, and all masculine plural nouns referring to persons.

### C. Adjectives with Masculine Plural Nouns.
Masculine plural nouns referring to persons also cause second state mutation in any adjective immediately following them.

e.g.. 
- An² dus² vysi the busy men.
- fleghes² vyghan little children.

In the following exercise, all the nouns are masculine, but they do not all refer to persons.

#### Exercise 3. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) The big books. 
2) The little men. 
3) The Welsh boys. 
4) The Cornish fishermen 
5) The little shops. 
6) The Breton students.
7) The ordinary house.
8) The Cornish correspondent.
9) The little friends.
10) The busy teachers.


### D. The Present Participle. 
This is a verbal adjective, and in English ends in “-ing.”

e.g.. a man walking. a woman talking. a boy running.

In Cornish it is formed by putting the particle 

- ow^4 in front of the Verb-Noun. 
- Owth is used if the verb-noun starts with a vowel or h.

e.g. 
- den ow^4 kwertha a man selling.
- benyn ow kewsel a woman speaking.

#### Exercise 4. 
Translate the following into Cornish:
1) A man sending a letter. 
2) A boy reading a book. 
3) A woman talking with me. 
4) A teacher teaching Cornish. 
5) A fisherman eating. 
6) My friend working in a shop.
7) A Cornishman thinking.
8) A secretary writing a letter.
9) Anjela saying “Good Morning!”
10) Erwan studying Celtic languages.


#### E. Use of Ha.
Ha (and) can be used with the present participle to express an action taking place at the same time as the main action.

e.g. 
Hag Erwan ow^4 kwari peldroes, yma Marie owth oberi.
While Erwan is playing football, Marie is working.

Hag ev ow^4 tos a- berth y’n st evell, Anjela a ros koffi dhodho.
As he came into the room, Anjela gave him some coffee.

This is essentially the same construction as that described in dyskans 9 under Ha, where the verb “to be” is understood.


#### Exercise 5. 
Translate into Cornish:

1) While she was working, Anjela received a letter.
2) As she was reading the letter, Yann arrived home.
3) While we study, we learn.
4) When he is selling books, Yowann is happy.
5) While you live in Cornwall, you speak Cornish.


### F. Prepositions and Verb-Nouns.
Prepositions usually show the relationship between one thing/person/action/idea and another.

e.g. 
- The book is on the chair. 
- He went without speaking. 
- He came after me.

In English, the kind of verb-noun used (sometimes called a “gerund”) ends in "-ing" just like the present participle mentioned above, and care must be taken not to confuse the two.

e.g. after going by telephoning before eating

In Cornish the form of the verb to use after a preposition is always the Verb-Noun.

e.g.
- wosa mos after going 
- kyns pellgewsel before phoning
- rag dybri for eating 
- heb koska without sleeping

#### Exercise 6. 

Translate the following into Cornish:

1) After sleeping. 
2) Before writing. 
3) Without speaking. 
4) After going. 
5) For reading. 
6) Without working.
7) Before saying.
8) Without thinking.
9) After selling.
10) Before studying.

#### G. Word Order. 
There are a number of examples in the reading passage in this lesson showing how Cornish can emphasise a word by putting it first in the sentence.

e.g. Pur skwith yw ev. = He is very tired.

It is quite correct to say, “Ev yw pur skwith,” but this suggests “**He** is very tired.”
whereas “Pur skwith yw ev,” suggests “He is **very tired**.”

Lyver my re² gollas I have lost a book.

This puts a main emphasis on “lyver” and a secondary emphasis on “my”.
Notice the effect of word order as you study Cornish. Caradar considered flexibility of word order and the variable emphasis that it can produce to be a main feature of the language.

Note also that we say an yeth kernewek with no mutation of the adjective. 
After s and th there is no soft mutation of p / t / k, but b / ch / d / g / m do mutate. 
Thus,  
- eglos vras but eglos teg, 
and  
- an yeth vretonek but an yeth kernewek.

Skrif
Write an account of not less than ten sentences on a day/morning/afternoon/evening at home or with friends. Invent some if you need to do so! The golden rule for writing in a language with which we are not very familiar is to use words and phrases that we know. This is not the time for finding out new ones.


