---
title: "LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Verbal sentences, Short and Long forms of bos"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-16T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---
# LYTHER YANN

A Yowann ker,
Fatla genes ha gans an teylu? My a² dhegemmeras dha lyther nans yw nebes seythunyow, ha gonn meur ras dhis anodho. My re beu ow pyskessa dres an mis usi passyes ha nyns esa chons dhymm dhe skrifa dhis. Ni a² gemmeras myns bras a² buskes, ha lemmyn yma dhymm seythun a² bowes kyns mos dhe² - ves arta. Rag henna, yma chons da dhymm dhe skrifa lytherow ha gul traow erell.

Teylu pur unys ha lowen on ni, mes kales yw bos warbarth ha my ow pyskessa hag Erwan ow studhya dhe’n² Bennskol. Hedhyw yth esov vy tre, hag yma Erwan tre ynwedh. Ass yw dydh lowen! Yth eson ni ow spena an termyn ow kewsel warbarth. Fatell esowgh hwi yn Kernow ow spena dy’ Sul? Chi nessa, ymons i ow mires orth an² bellwolok pub eur oll, mes omma ni a² gar keskewsel a- dro dh’agan bywnans dy’gweyth. Skrif dhymm arta, mar pleg,

Dha² goweth,
Yann.

#### Gerva
seythun f (seythunyow) week(s)
my re beu I have been
passyes which has passed
esa was
chons (chonsyow) chance(s)
myns quantity
bras large
pysk (puskes) fish(es)
powes rest
dhe² - ves away
rag henna therefore
tra f (traow) thing
arall (erell) other(s).
unys united
on ni we are
kales hard
bos to be
yth esov I am
Ass yw dydh lowen!
What a happy day it is!
yth eson we are
spena to spend (time)
termyn time
ow kewsel talking
fatell esowgh hwi ow spena?
how are you spending?
chi nessa next door
mires orth to look at
pub eur oll all the time
keskewsel to converse
bywnans life
pygemmys? how many?
kemmeres to catch
dydh (dydhyow) day(s)
an jydh the day
(special mutation)

#### Govynnow

1) P’eur⁵ tegemmeras Yann lyther Yowann?
2) Prag na² worthybis Yann kyns?
3) Pygemmys puskes a² gemmeras Yann?
4) Pandr’a² wra Yann dhe² wul hag ev tre?
5) Prag yth yw kales dhe’n teylu bos warbarth?
6) Py dydh yw an teylu warbarth?
7) Prag yth yw an jydh lowen?
8) Fatell² wra an teylu spena an termyn?
9) Pandr’a² wra an² dus dhe wul chi nessa?
10) Piw a skrif an lyther?

### Gramasek

#### A. Verbal Sentences.

So far we have noted the following points on Nominal Sentences. 

In these:
1) The subject, noun or pronoun, is followed by a verbal particle and both come before the verb.
2) The verb is always 3rd person singular. For this the past tense of the verb usually ends in -as or - is.
3) The Verbal particle is a² for the present and past tenses and re² for the perfect tense (I have sold, etc.)
4) The verb gul (to do) plus the verb noun can be used as an alternative.

These sentences are used to make simple affirmative statements with some degree of emphasis on the subject.

If the subject is not to be emphasised, we may use a Verbal Sentence. In a Verbal Sentence, the form or ending of the verb varies to agree with the subject, if a pronoun.

But if the subject is a noun, is always 3rd. sing. The subject follows the verb.

In negative sentences the subject may come first for emphasis. If such a subject is a plural noun, the verb is also plural. If a plural noun subject follows the verb, the verb is singular.

The verb bos (to be) is commonly used in this way and there are several examples in this lesson. It has Short and Long forms.

### B. Short forms of bos, Present Tense.

- ov vy (oma) I am
- os jy (osta) you are
- yw ev (ywa) he is / it is
- yw hi (ywi) she is / it is
- on ni we are
- owgh hwi you are
- yns i they are


In each case, the pronoun (I, you, he, etc.) follows the actual verb (am, are, is). The forms in brackets are combinations of the verb with the pronoun which are frequently used.


All these pronouns are optional as the actual form of the verb is sufficient to make the meaning clear. However, their use is very common. Notice that the first two are not the same as the list given in dyskans 7. Pronouns which follow the verb are called
Suffixed Pronouns.

e.g. 
- Lowen on ni. We are happy.
- Pyskador yw ev. He is a fisherman.

These examples show how the noun or adjective that forms the rest of short sentences like these (called the “complement”) comes in front of the verb. Do the following exercise in the same way.

#### Exercise 1. 
Translate the following into Cornish:
1) They are happy. 
2) You (s.) are a student. 
3) She is a secretary.
4) I am a Cornishman. 
5) They are Welsh. 
6) You (p) are Breton.
7) He is Yann.
8) She is Anjela.
9) I am his father.
10) We are Celtic.

In such sentences there is some degree of emphasis on the complement. It is also possible to start with the verb and subject and follow these with the complement, making the emphasis more neutral. In this case the particle Yth comes before the verb;

e.g. 
- Yth ov vy pyskador. I am a fisherman.
- Yth on ni Kernowyon. We are Cornish people.

#### Exercise 2. 
_Repeat exercise 1, using the “_ Yth - verb - subject - _complement” pattern,_ as shown in the examples.




#### C. The Long forms of bos.
The above examples told us who/what/how a person or thing is. This is how the short forms of bos are used. They cannot be used to say where something/someone is, or what he/she/it is doing. 

To do this we need the long forms of bos:

|yth esov vy (esoma) |I am|
|yth esos jy (esosta) |you are|
|yma ev |he / it is|
|yma hi |she / it is.|
|yth eson| ni we are.|
|yth esowgh hwi |you are.|
|ymons i |they are.|


Again, the contracted forms in brackets are commonly used alternatives.

The long forms show where a person/thing/place is.

e.g. 
- Yth esov vy y’n lowarth. I am in the garden.
- Yth eson ni y’n gwerthji. We are in the shop.
- Yn Truru yma ev. He is in Truro.

As will be seen, the verb with its particle and subject can go before or after the prepositional phrase showing where. The yth must be there in both cases, but yma and ymons do not have yth in front.


#### Exercise 3. 
Translate the following into Cornish. The choice of the two word orders is yours. 

If the place is put first there is slightly more emphasis on this.

1) He is in Cornwall. 
2) She is in Brittany. 
3) We are in England (Pow Sows). 
4) I am with Lowena. 
5) They are in the café. 
6) You are in the car.
7) He is with her.
8) She is next door.
9) It is in the book.
10) It is near the café.

### D. Present Participle. 
The long forms are also used with ow^4 and the verb-noun, forming the present participle (dyskans 11) to show what some one is doing.

e.g. 
- Yth esov ow skrifa. I am writing.
- Yma hi ow kewsel. She is speaking.
- Owth eva ymons i. They are drinking.

Again, we have a similar choice as to word order, which you may use in the following exercise.

#### Exercise 4. 
Translate the following into Cornish:
1) We are selling books.
2) He is speaking Cornish.
3) I am reading a book.
4) She is learning Breton.
5) You are fishing.


If the subject is a noun following the verb, yma (sing.) is used whether the noun is singular or plural,

e.g. 
- Yma Yowann owth oberi. Yowann is working.
- Yma’n² byskadoryon y’n kok. The fishermen are in the boat.

#### Exercise 5. 
Translate the following into Cornish:
1) The teachers are working in the school.
2) The children are working too.
3) The letters are in the office.
4) The friends are in the car.
5) The people are talking to (with) the children.


If a noun subject precedes the verb, yma is used if the noun is singular and ymons if plural. The corresponding subject pronoun may sometimes follow the verb because this is the true subject, the noun in front being there just to attract emphasis.

e.g. 
- Anjela yma (hi) ow mos dhe’n koffiji. Anjela is going to the café.
- An fleghes ymons (ymons i) ow redya. The children are reading.

#### Exercise 6. 
Translate the following, putting the noun subject first. The use of ymons or ymons i is optional.

1) The friends are talking.
2) Yann and Anjela are watching the television.
3) The men are sleeping.
4) The children are in the school.
5) The books are behind the television.


