---
title: "KYNSA LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Demonstrative Pronouns, yn-medh, eus, and war² with pronouns"
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-17T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---






AN KLASS GORTHUGHER
Dy’ Yow yw, ha Yowann ha Jenifer a dhe’n skol nowydh y’n² dre. Ena, yma klassys gorthugher yn lies mater, Sowsnek, Frynkek, Spaynek, Almaynek, Jynnskrifa, Art, Gul kanstellow, hag erell, y’ga mysk, Kernewek. Yowann re sewenas y’n apposyans kynsa gradh, hag ev a dhe’n klass nessa gradh.

Dallethores yw Jenifer ha hi a dhe’n klass rag dallethoryon. Yma neb deg studhyer y’n klass.

Yma dhe’n dyskador moes² veur ha lies tra warnedhi. Yma aval, lo, pluvenn, hanaf, bleujenn, ha kanstell. Ev a² dhiskwa an² bluvenn dhe’n klass.

“Pyth yw hemma?” yn-medh ev.

“Pluvenn yw honna,” yn-medh Tamsin.

“Pur² dha,” yn-medh an dyskador. “Ha pyth yw hemma?”

“Kanstell yw honna,” yn-medh Hykka ha Jori.

“Ha pyth yw hemma?” yn-medh an dyskador, ow tiskwedhes an hanaf.

“Gwedrenn yw honna,” yn-medh Jenifer.

“Nag yw!” yn-medh an klass ow hwerthin.

“Dhe² wir, nag yw,” yn-medh an dyskador. “Hanaf ywa, Jenifer!”

Yma’n studhyoryon erell ow hwerthin. hwath.

“A ny² wodhesta pyth yw hanaf, Jenifer?” yn-medhons i!

#### Gerva
nowydh new.
lies (followed by sing. noun) many
mater (school) subject
Spaynek Spanish
Almaynek German
jynnskrifa typing
gul kanstellow basket making
y’ga mysk including
seweni to succeed
apposyans examination
kynsa gradh first grade
nessa second
dallethores _f_ beginner _f_
dallethoryon beginners
neb deg about ten
moes _f_ (moesow) table(s)
warnedhi on it
aval (avalow) apple(s)
lo _f_ (loyow) spoon(s)
pluvenn _f_ (pluvennow) pen(s)
hanaf (hanafow) cup(s)
bleujenn f (bleujennow) flower(s)
kanstell f (kanstellow) basket(s)
diskwedhes to show
hemma f homma this
henna f honna that
yn-medh says
Tamsin girl’s name
Hykka boy’s name
Jori boy’s name
gwedrenn f (gwedrennow)
drinking glass
nag yw it is not
hwerthin to laugh
dhe² wir indeed, really
hwath still
yn-medhons i they say
a ny wodhesta? don’t you know?
ynno in it
ev a dhiskwa he shows


#### Govynnow
1) Py dydh a Yowann ha Jenifer dhe’n klass gorthugher?
2) Py par skol yw hi?
3) Py apposyans a sewenas Yowann ynno?
4) Piw yw dallethores?
5) Pygemmys studhyoryon eus y’n klass?
6) Pyth eus dhe’n dyskador?
7) Py traow eus war an² voes?
8) Piw a lever hanow an² bluvenn?
9) Pandr’a² dhiskwa Hykka ha Jori?
10) Piw yw na² woer pyth yw hanaf?

### Gramasek

#### A. Demonstrative pronouns singular.
| hemma (m) | this (one) | (replaces masc. noun.)| 
| homma (f) | this (one) | (replaces fem. noun.)| 
| henna (m) | that (one) | (replaces masc. noun.)| 
| honna (f) | that (one) | (replaces fem. noun.)| 

As M comes before N in the alphabet, so we think of “this” before “that.”

M -> N : hemma -> henna : this -> that.

e.g. 

- Lyver yw hemma. This is a book. ( Lyver - masc.)
- Moes yw homma. This is a table ( Moes - fem.)
- Aval yw henna. That is an apple ( Aval - masc.)
- Pluvenn yw honna. That is a pen. ( Pluvenn - fem.)

#### Exercise 1
Translate the following into Cornish as in the above examples:_

1) This is Yowann’s shop.
2) This is Anjela’s café.
3) This is a basket.
4) That is a beginner.
5) That is Yowann’s teacher.

This word order may be reversed giving some change of emphasis. When followed by yw , the pronouns drop their final “ a ”.

e.g. 
- Hemm yw lyver. This is a book.
- Homm yw moes. This is a table.

#### Exercise 2 
Translate the following into Cornish, starting with the pronoun, as in the examples:

1) This is Erwan.
2) That is Marie.
3) That is Yann’s boat.
4) This is my father.
5) This is my mother.


#### B. Yn-medh. 
This is used with direct speech inside quotation marks (speech marks) to mean “says” or “said.” Its subject, which must follow, may be a singular pronoun:

e.g. “Pyth yw hemma?” yn-medh ev “What is this?” he says/said.

OR a noun, singular or plural:

e.g. 
- “Pur² dha,” yn-medh an dyskador.” “Very good,” says/said the teacher.
-“Nag yw,” yn-medh an studhyoryon.” “It isn’t,” say/said the students.
 
#### Yn-medhons i. (They say/said). 

This plural form is used only with the third person plural pronoun I (they):

e.g. 
- “A ny² wodhesta pyth yw hanaf?” yn-medhons i.
- “Don’t you know what a cup is?” they say/said.

#### Exercise 3. 
Translate into Cornish:

1) “What is this?” said the teacher.
2) “This is an apple.” said Yowann.
3) “This is a pen,” she said.
4) “That is a letter.” he said.
5) “This is a basket.” said Angela.
6) “Good morning,” said the man.
7) “Good evening,” said the waitress.
S) “Very good,” they said.
9) “Indeed, it is not.” he said.
10) “Where is the apple?” they said.

### C. Eus. (Is/is there). 

This word is used in place of Yma ( is/there is) if the sentence is a question or negative, or in reply to a question:

e.g. 
- Eus kres? Eus. Is there peace? There is. (i.e. Yes.)
- Nag eus, nyns eus kres. There is not (i.e. No), there is not peace.

There is no actual word for “yes” or “no,” so these words are expressed as shown in the examples.

If eus is used in a simple negative statement, Nyns is used before the eus :

e.g. Nyns eus aval y’n² ganstell. There is not an apple in the basket.

If it is used just to indicate “No.” in answer to a question, Nag eus is used:

e.g. Eus lyther gans an lytherwas? Nag eus. Does the postman have a letter? No.

Answers beginning:“Yes, there is/are..” or “No, there is not/are not..” are expressed as follows

e.g. 
- Eus, yma gwin y’n² wedrenn. Yes, there is some wine in the glass.
- Eus, yma bara y’n gegin. Yes, there is some bread in the kitchen.
- Nag eus, nyns eus lyther dhe’n lytherwas.
- No, the postman does not have a letter.
- Nag eus, nyns eus lyvrow da yn gwerthji Yowann
- No, there are not any good books in Yowann’s shop.


#### Exercise 4. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) What does the teacher have?
2) What things are on the table?
3) Is there a school in Truro? Yes.
4) Is there a book in the house?
5) What is there in the café?
6) No, there is no beer in the pub.
7) Are there any apples in the basket? No.
8) No, there is no wine in the glass.
9) Yes, there is some coffee in the cup.
10) Is there a letter today? Yes.


#### D. Use of usi.

Notice: Usi an bara ryb an pott te? Is the bread by the tea pot?

Usi is used, not eus because an bara is definite, in other words, because it is “the bread” not just “some bread,” which would be indefinite, and the “ an ” would be omitted. So, to give the answer:

“No, the bread is by the sugar,” we would say “Nag usi, yma’n bara ryb an sugra.”

Compare this with 

“Eus oy dhe’n yar ma?” “Does this hen have an egg?”

Oy meaning “an egg” is indefinite and eus is used as explained above.

So, to answer “Yes, this hen does have an egg”, we say, “ Eus, yma oy dhe’n yar ma.”

#### Exercise 5. 
Translate the following into Cornish:

1) Is the sugar in the tea?
2) No, the sugar is not in the tea.
3) Is the apple in the basket?
4) Yes the apple is in the basket.
5) No, the teacher is not on the table!

#### D. War (on) and yn (in). 
Like gans and dhe² (Dyskans 7) these two prepositions combine with personal pronouns as shown in the table below:

| warnav | on me | 
| warnas | on you (s) | 
| warnodho | on him/it |
| warnedhi | on her/it | 
| warnan | on us | 
| warnowgh | on you (p) | 
| warnedha | on them |

| ynnov | in me |
| ynnos | in you (s) |
| ynno | in him/it |
| ynni | in her/it |
| ynnon | in us |
| ynnowgh | in you (p) |
| ynna | in them |

#### Exercise 6. 
Translate the following into Cornish:_

1) Is there a letter on it?
2) No, there is a book on it.
3) Are there some cups in them?
4) Yes, there are some cups in them.
5) You are on it.

#### Skrif.
Imagine you are teaching a beginners’ class. Make up a series of questions and answers asking and answering what and where things are:

e.g 
- Pyth yw hemma? Aval yw henna.
- Ple’ma’n aval? Yma ev y’n² ganstell.

When an object is mentioned for the first time, hemma or henna is used in the question even if the object is feminine, as its identity has not yet been established.


