---
title: "KYNSA LYTHER YANN"
layout: kdlold
description: "Present and Past tenses of gul, Interrogative particle A², Particle Y⁵, Res yw, Gwell yw, Possessive Adjectives with nouns and verb nouns, Future Tense, Present and Past tenses of gweles and galloes."
images: ['/img/kdl800x400.jpg']
date: 2022-01-18T14:00:00Z
label: "course"
authors: ["Ray Edwards"]
audio: ""
tags: []
videos: []
draft: false
---




# Y’N TREN
Dy’ Lun, myttinweyth, Erwan a² wrug mos dhe Roazhon y’n tren. Res yw dhodho drehedhes ena erbynn unnek eur. Y’n eur na yma dyskans yn kever an yeth kernewek. Dhe’n gorsav, ev a² vetyas orth dew² goweth a² wra mos dhe’n² bennskol kekeffrys.

“Myttin da, Erwan,” yn-medhons i dhodho. 

“Myttin da,” Erwan a² worthybis, “Fatla genowgh hedhyw? A² wrussowgh hwi kowlwul an skrif yn kever ‘Gwrians an Bys’?”

“Na² wrug,” unn koweth a worthybis. “Yma genen bys y’n seythun a² dheu dh’y² worfenna. A² wrussysta y² gowlwul dha honan?” 

“Gwrug,” Erwan a² worthybis.

“Ottomma an tren!” yn-medh an nessa kothman. “Res yw dhymm kavoes kocha ma nag eus megi. Gwell yw genev kocha a’n par na.”
Yn gwella prys, an tren a wrug hedhi, ha daras a-dherag an tri howeth gans arwoedh “Megi difennys.”

“Deun yn rag!” yn-medh Erwan. “Nyns eus saw unn den ynno.”

An tri a² wrug gorra aga seghyer war an roes-fardellow. Skon, an tren a wrug dalleth an fordh, an peswar tremenyas a’ga esedh, attes. Wosa pymp mynysenn an den a² wrug gorra tan dhe sigaret ha hwytha kommolenn euthyk a² vog a-berth y’n kocha!


### Gerva
a² wrug mos went
tren (trenow) train(s)
res yw dhodho he must
erbynn unnek eur by 11 o’clock
y’n eur na at that time
dyskans (dyskansow) lesson(s)
gorsav (gorsavow) station(s)
kekeffrys also
a² worthybis answered.
fatla genowgh? how are you?
A² wrussowgh hwi kowlwul?
Have you completed?
kothman(p)kothmans
friend/comrade
a’ga esedh sitting
Na² wrug No, I haven’t
an seythun a² dheu the coming week
dh’y worfenna to finish it
ottomma here is
res yw dhymm I must
kavoes (to) find
kocha carriage
ma nag eus megi
where there is no smoking
gwell yw genev I prefer
a’n par na like that
yn gwella prys fortunately
hedhi to stop
daras (darasow) door(s)
a-dherag in front of
arwoedh f (arwoedhyow) sign(s)
megi difennys no smoking
deun yn rag! come on!
nyns eus saw there is only
gorra to put
sagh (seghyer) bag(s)
roes-fardellow f luggage rack
dalleth to begin
fordh f (fordhow) journey(s)
tremenyas passenger
attes comfortably
mynysenn f (mynysennow) minute(s)
tan (tanyow) fire(s)
sigaret cigarette
hwytha to blow
a-berth y’n into the
kommolenn _f_ ( kommol) cloud(s)
euthyk frightful
a² vog of smoke
leverel to say
eva to drink

_euthyk_ is in the Gerva with its former spelling, euthek
_“Gwrians an Bys”_ “The Creation of the World” is a Cornish Miracle Play

### Govynnow
1) Fatell² wrug Erwan mos dhe Roazhon?
2) P’eur eus dyskans dhodho?
3) Piw a² vetyas orth Erwan dhe’n gorsav?
4) Piw ny² wrug kowlwul an skrif?
5) Prag na² wrug ev y worfenna?
6) Piw a leveris, “Ottomma an tren.”?
7) Pygemmys tus esa y’n kocha?
8) Ple⁵ hworras an gowetha aga seghyer?
9) Pandr’a² wrug an den?
10) Pyth esa y’n kocha ena?

### Gramasek

#### A. Present Tense of gul (to do/make). 

Here are the unmutated forms.


- **gwrav** = I do/make 
- **gwredh** = you do/make 
- **gwra** = he/she/it does/makes
- **gwren** = we do/make. 
- **gwrewgh** = you do/make. 
- **gwrons** = they do/make.

These unmutated forms are not normally used except to answer “Yes” to a question:

*A² wra ev* dos a-vorow? **Gwra.**  
*Will he* come tomorrow? **Yes. (he will.)**


*A² wredh* megi? **Gwrav**.  
*Do you* smoke? **Yes (I do)**.

*A² wra Yowann* gwertha lyvrow? **Gwra**.  
*Does Yowann* sell books? **Yes**. 

*A² wren ni* mos y’n tren? **Gwren**.  
*Do we* go in the train? **Yes (we do)**

***


#### B. Interrogative particle A².
The questions above show how this is used. It is put before the verb, and so starts the question off when there is no question word like “What” or “Where.” 

If the subject is a pronoun, it may be omitted or placed after the verb. (See lessons 7 & 12).

If the subject is a noun, as in the third example, it follows the verb.

#### Exercise 1. 
Translate the following into Cornish with the help of the examples above.

1) Do we go to Cornwall today? Yes.
2) Do they speak Breton? Yes.
3) Do you drink beer? Yes.
4) Does he fish? Yes.
5) Do you like Lowena? Yes.
6) Do they correspond? Yes.
7) Does Anjela learn Cornish? Yes.
8) Do Anjela and Yann live in Brittany? Yes
9) Do they drink coffee? Yes.
10) Do they go to a class? Yes.

***



#### C. Particle Y⁵. 
When used in a simple verbal sentence or main clause, the verb has the particle Y⁵ in front, and is often followed by the subject whether noun or pronoun. 

Subject pronouns may be in the forms given in lesson 12. These forms usually carry some stress.

Alternative unstressed forms are often used and these are joined on to the verb. Both possibilities are shown in the table below:

Y⁵ hwrav vy (hwrama) = I do/make  
Y⁵ hwredh jy (hwreta = You do/make  
Y⁵ hwra ev (hwrava) = He/It does/makes  
Y⁵ hwra hi = She/It does/makes  
Y⁵ hwren ni = We do/make  
Y⁵ hwrewgh hwi = You do/make  
Y⁵ hwrons (hwrons i) = They do/make  

e.g. 
Y⁵ hwrav vy kewsel Kernewek. = I (do) speak Cornish.  
Y⁵ hwra kesskrifa gans Yann. =  He corresponds with Yann.  
Y⁵ hwren ni triga yn Kernow. = We live in Cornwall.  

Note that these verbal sentences start with Y⁵ followed by the verb, then the subject, if expressed.

#### Exercise 2. 
Translate the following into Cornish using verbal sentences, as in the examples above.

1) I learn Cornish. 
2) Yowann sells books. 
3) We fish. 
4) They read my letters. 
5) Anjela speaks French. 
6) He sends the letter.
7) You drink beer.
8) They work.
9) He goes.
10) She returns.

#### D. Negative of gul. 
The verb is made negative by replacing the particle Y⁵^ with the negative particle Ny².

Ny² wrav kewsel Kernewek. I do not speak Cornish.  
Ny² wra hi kesskrifa gans Yann. She does not correspond with Yann.  
Ny² wra Anjela triga yn Kernow. Anjela does not live in Cornwall.  

#### Exercise 3. 
Repeat exercise 2 in the negative, with the help of the examples._

### E. Past Tense of Gul. 

The table below shows the unmutated forms: 

Gwrug (Y⁵ hwrugavy) I did/made.  
Gwrussys ( Y⁵ hwrussysta, hwruss’ta) You did/made.  
Gwrug (Y⁵ hwruga) He/She/It did/made.  
Gwrussyn We did/made.  
Gwrussowgh You did/made.  
Gwrussons (Y⁵ hwrussons i) They did/made.  


These forms are used just like the present tense forms, i.e.: 

Preceded by “ A² ” to ask a question:  
*A² wrug ev* mos dhe Roazhon?   
*Did he* go to Rennes?  

Unmutated to answer “Yes” to a question:  
*A wruss’ta* gweles Erwan? Gwrug.  
*Did you* see Erwan? Yes (I did.)  

Preceded by “Y⁵” to make a simple affirmative statement:  
*Y⁵ hwrugavy* gul an ober.  
*I did* the work.  

Preceded by “Ny²” to make a negative statement:  
*Ny² wrussons i* gul an ober.   
*They did not* do the work.


#### Exercise 4. 
Using the past tense of_ _gul_ _and with the help of these examples, translate the following into Cornish._

1) I went to Rennes. 
2) She sent the letter. 
3) They spoke to you. 
4) We did not work. 
5) You did not write. 
6) He did not fish.
7) Did he sell the book? Yes.
8) Did you drink the wine? Yes.
9) Did they put their bags on the luggage rack? Yes.
10) Did I show you my book? Yes.

(Remember that any of the above affirmative statements can also be expressed as a Nominal sentence, and indeed this would be the more usual and natural form:


e.g. (example 1, above) 

My a² wrug mos dhe Roazhon.  
I went to Rennes.

But questions and negative statements must be expressed verbally as above. However for the sake of emphasis it is possible to put a subject before the Ny²^ in a negative sentence: 

An studhyoryon *ny² wrussons* mos dhe Sen Malo. 
The students *did not* go to St. Malo.


Such sentences in the singular were dealt with in Dyskans 4.

#### F. Negative answers. 
To make negative the unmutated forms of gul expressing an answer “Yes” so as to give an answer “No,” the particle Na² is used:

*A² wreta* mos dhe Druru? **Na² wrav**.  
*Are you* going to Truro? **No (I’m not)**.  

*A² wruss’ta* redya “Gwrians an Bys”? **Na² wrug**.  
*Have you* read “The Creation of the World.” **No. (I haven’t)**.  

*A² wra ev* studhya y’n² Bennskol? Na² wra.  
Does he study at the University? No (he doesn’t).  

A² wrussons i metya orth Jenifer? Na² wrussons.  
Did they meet Jenifer? No (they didn’t).  

#### Exercise 5. 
Translate the following into Cornish. The form of question is the same in Cornish, whether it starts in English with “Have,” “Has”, or “Did.”

1) Have you read Kemmysk Kernewek? No.
2) Did she reach St. Malo? No.
3) Do you speak Cornish? No.
4) Did they write to the secretary? No.
5) Do you learn Spanish? No.`
6) Did he read your letter? No.
7) Did we drink the coffee? No.
8) Does he like Anjela? No.
9) Have they shown you their house? No.
10) Has she written to him? No.


#### G. Res yw (It is necessary). 

When followed by dhe² this phrase indicates that someone must do something:
Res yw dhodho. It is necessary for him, He must.
Res yw dhe Yann. Yann must.
Res yw dhymm. I must.
Res yw dhe Anjela oberi y’n koffiji. Anjela must work in the café.
As the last example shows, a verb noun indicates what it is the person must do.



#### Exercise 6. Translate the following into Cornish:_
1) I must go to Cornwall. 4) Yann must fish.
2) We must work for Cornwall. 5) Marie must go with Anjela.
3) Lowena must study.


#### H. Gwell yw (It is better). 
When followed by gans this phrase indicates that someone prefers to do something.

Gwell yw ganso. It is better with him, He prefers.
Gwell yw gans Yann. Yann prefers.
Gwell yw genev. I prefer.
Gwell yw gans Yowann oberi yn Kernow. Yowann prefers to work in Cornwall.

#### Exercise 7. 
Translate the following into Cornish:
1) She prefers to go to Brittany.
2) They prefer to write letters.
3) Anjela prefers to work in the café.
4) Jenifer prefers to live in Cornwall.
5) I prefer to learn Cornish.

#### I. Possessive Adjectives. 
We have already met some of them. Here is a complete list:

ow^3 my 
dha²^ your (s) 
y² his/its 
hy^3 her/its
agan our
agas your (p)
aga^3^ their

Note that the “ a ” in dha² (your) is a neutral vowel so that the word sounds the same as the English word “the”:

ow^3 har my friend. dha² das your father.
agan chi our house. aga^3 herens their friends.

You will see that particular care is needed here with mutations. KDL will continue to give the mutation number with every word causing it throughout the first and second/third grade courses. You must check with your Mutation Chart. Eventually you
will find (to your surprise!) that you are making the correct mutations without even thinking about it!

#### Exercise 8. 
Translate the following into Cornish taking particular care with the mutations:_
1) my house
2) your (s) friend
3) our father
4) her friend
5) their books
6)your(p)country
7) my father
8) their friends
9) your (s) glass
10) our car


#### J. Object Pronouns. 
Possessive adjectives are also used to express object pronouns with verb nouns:

Y⁵ hwrav y² dhannvon 
I do his sending, I send him.

My a² vynn y² dhyski 
I want its learning, I want to learn it.

Res yw dhymm dha² dhannvon
It is necessary to me to send you, I must send you.

Res yw dhe Jenifer y redya Jenifer must read it.
Y⁵ hwrussons i aga honvedhes They understood them.

Notice that the possessive adjective goes in front of the verb noun, whereas in English, the corresponding pronoun follows it.

### Exercise 9. 
With the help of the examples, translate the following into Cornish:

1) He must learn it.
2) He lost her. 
3) She lost him. 
4) I have found you. 
5) We must send him. 
6) I prefer to send them.
7) We prefer to sell it.
8) They found us.
9) He can find me.
10) She cannot find me.

### K. The Future Tense. 
Cornish has no separate future tense but the Present Tense also serves as a Future Tense, so that all the examples we have met so far in the present tense could also have a future meaning if this were appropriate:

Y⁵ hwrav y² dhannvon (also) I shall send him.

We have met the two present tenses of bos (to be) and the present and past tenses of gul (to do/make). Bos is one of the few exceptions to the above rule. It does have a separate future tense which we shall meet later. Now some more verbs:


#### L. Gweles (To see).

 Present Tense  Past Tense 
 gwelav I see  gwelis I saw 
 gwelydh You see  gwelsys You saw 
 gwel He/she/it sees.  gwelas He/she/it saw 
 gwelyn We see  gwelsyn We saw 
 gwelowgh You see  gwelsowgh You saw 
 gwelons They see  gwelsons They saw 

As with gul, these forms are used with Y⁵ to make a simple affirmative statement, with Ny² to make a negative statement, with A² to ask a question, and with Na²^ to give a negative answer. 

The unmutated form is used to give an affirmative answer.
- Y⁵ hwelav dha² ji I see your house.
- Ny² welav dha² ji I do not see your house.
- A² welsysta ow chi? Did you see my house?
- Gwelis, my a² welas dha² ji Yes, I saw your house.
- Na² welis, ny² welis vy dha² ji No, I did not see your house.

#### Exercise 10. 
Translate the following into Cornish, using the present or past tenses of gweles.

1) Did you see the shop? Yes. 
2) Did he see your friend? No. 
3) They saw the café.
4) You see the fishing boat.
5) She sees her mother.

#### M. Galloes (to be able). 
This verb usually indicates that a person can do something because it is permissible or physically possible, not that he has the knowledge necessary to do it. This distinction was mentioned briefly in lesson 6.

 _Present Tense  Past Tense_  
 gallav I can  gyllis I could  
 gyllydh You can  gyllsys You could  
 gyll He/She/It can  gallas He/She/It could.  
 gyllyn We can  gyllsyn We could  
 gyllowgh You can  gyllsowgh You could  
 gyllons They can  gallsons They could  


This verb can also be used as indicated above with the appropriate particles and mutations. It is used with a verb noun to indicate the action which can be done which may have a possessive adjective before it to express an object pronoun:

- Y⁵ hyll ev ow gweres He can help me.
- Ny² allav y² weres I cannot help him.
- A² yllsys dannvon an lyther? Were you able to send the letter?
- Gyllis, y⁵ hyllis y² dhannvon Yes, I could send it.
- Na² yllis, ny² yllis y² dhannvon No, I could not send it.

#### Exercise 11. 
Translate the following into Cornish, using the present or past forms of “galloes”:
1) I can go to the University. 
2) We could not drink the beer. 
3) Could you send the letter? No.
4) Can you read the letter? Yes.
5) I can work in the bookshop.

(This lesson has been something of a Marathon, but do not lose heart! Later lessons will be
rather shorter!)


